We introduce the bilingual dual-coding theory as a model for bilingual mental representation .
Based on this model , lexical selection neural networks are implemented for a connectionist transfer project in machine translation .
Psycholinguistic knowledge would be greatly helpful , as we believe , in constructing an artificial language processing system .
how the languages are represented in human mind ;
how the representation is mapped from one language to another ;
how the representation and mapping are acquired by human .
The bilingual dual-coding theory Paivio 1986 partially answers the above questions .
It depicts the verbal representations for two different languages as two separate but connected logogen systems , characterizes the translation process as the activation along the connections between the logogen systems , and attributes the acquisition of the representation to some unspecified statistical processes .
We have explored an information theoretical neural network Gorin and Levinson 1989 that can acquire the verbal associations in the dual-coding theory .
It provides a learnable lexical selection sub-system for a connectionist transfer project in machine translation .
There is a well-known debate in psycholinguistics concerning the bilingual mental representation : independence position assumes that bilingual memory is represented by two functionally independent storage and retrieval systems , whereas interdependence position hypothesizes that all information of languages exists in a common memory store .
Studies on cross-language transfer and cross-language priming have provided evidence for both hypotheses de Groot and Nas 1991, Lambert et al. 1958 .
Dual-coding theory explains the coexistence of independent and interdependent phenomena with separate but connected structures .
The general dual-coding theory hypothesizes that human represents language with dual systems -- the verbal system and the imagery system .
The elements of the verbal system are logogens for words in a language .
The elements of the imagery system , called `` imagens '' , are connected to the logogens in the verbal systems via referential connections .
Logogens in a verbal system are also interconnected with associative connections .
The bilingual dual-coding theory proposes an architecture in which a common imagery system is connected to two verbal systems , and the two verbal systems are interconnected to each other via associative connections [ Figure  ] .
Unlike the within-language associations , which are rich and diverse , these between-language associations involve primarily translation equivalent terms that are experienced together frequently .
The interconnections among the three systems explain the interdependent functional behavior .
On the other hand , the different characteristics of within-language and between-language associations account for the independent functional behavior .
Based on the above structural assumption , dual-coding theory proposes a parallel set of processing assumptions .
Activation of connections between referentially related imagens and logogens is called referential processing .
Naming objects and imaging to words are prototypical examples .
Activation of associative connections between logogens is called associative processing .
Lexical translation is an example of associative processing between two languages .
Lexical selection is the task of choosing target language words that accurately reflect the meaning of the corresponding source language words .
It plays an important role in machine translation Pustejovsky and Nirenburg 1987 .
A common lexical selection practice involves an intermediate representation .
It disambiguates the source language words to entities in the intermediate representation , then maps from the entities to the target lexical entries .
This intermediate representation may be Lexical Concept Structure Dorr 1989 or interlingua Nirenberg et al. 1987 .
This engineering approach requires great effort in designing the representation and the mapping rules .
Currently , there are some efforts in statistical lexical selection .
A target language word W  can be selected with the posterior probability Pr ( W  ` | W  ) given the source language word W  .
Several target language lexical entries may be selected for a single source language word .
Then the correct selections can be identified by the language model of the target language Brown et al. 1990 .
This approach is learnable .
However , the accuracy is low .
One reason is that it does not use any structural information of a language .
In next subsections , we propose information-theoretical networks based on the bilingual dual-coding theory for lexical selection .
Information-theoretical network is a neural network formalism that is capable of doing associations between two layers of representations .
The associations can be obtained statistically according to the network 's experiences .
An information-theoretical network has two layers .
Each unit of a layer represents an element in the input or output of a training pattern , which might be a logogen or a word .
Units in different layers are connected .
The weight of the connection between unit i in one layer and unit j in the other layer is assigned with the mutual information between the elements represented by the two units
Each layer also contains a bias unit , which is always activated .
The weight of the connection between the bias unit in one layer and unit j in the other layer is
Both the information-theoretical network and the back-propagation network compute the posterior probabilities for an association task Gorin and Levinson 1989, Robinson 1992 .
However , only the information-theoretical network is isomorphic to the directly interconnected verbal systems in the dual-coding theory .
Besides , an information-theoretical network has the following advantages :
it learns fast .
The network can learn in a single pass without gradient decent .
it is adaptive .
It can incrementally adapt to new experiences simply by adding new data to the training samples and modifying the associations according to the changed statistics .
These make the network more psychologically plausible .
We tried to map source language f-structures to target language f-structure in a connectionist transfer project Wang and Waibel 1994 .
finding the target sub-structures , their phrasal categories and their corresponding source structures ;
finding the head of a target structure .
The second sub-task is a problem of lexical selection .
It was first implemented with a back-propagation network .
We replaced the back-propagation networks for lexical selection with information-theoretical networks simulating the associative process in the dual-coding theory .
The networks have two layers of units .
Each source ( target ) language lexical item is represented by a unit in the input ( output ) layer .
One network is constructed for each phrasal category  .
The networks works in the following way : for a target-language f-structure to be generated , the transfer system knows its phrasal category and its corresponding source-language f-structure from the networks that perform the sub-task  .
It then activates the lexical selection network for that phrasal category with the input units that correspond to the heads of the source language f-structure and its sub-structures .
Through the connections between the two layers , the output units are activated , and the lexical item that corresponds to the most active output unit is selected as the head of the target f-structure .
The following example illustrates how the system selects the head anmelden for the German XCOMP sub-structure when it does the transfer from
to
Since the structure networks find that there is a VP sub-structure of XCOMP in the target structure whose corresponding input structure is EQN] , it activates the VP lexical selection network 's input units for I , register and conference .
By propagating the activation via the associative connections , the unit for anmelden is the most active output .
Therefore , ` anmelden ' is chosen as the head of the xcomp sub-structure .
The domain of our work was the Conference Registration Telephony Conversations .
The lexicon for the task contained about 500 English and 500 German words .
There were 300 English / German f-structure pairs available from other research tasks Osterholtz et al. 1992 .
A separate set of 154 sentential f-structures was used to test the generalization performance of the system .
The testing data was collected for an independent task Jain 1991 .
From the 300 sentential f-structure pairs , every German VP sub-structure is extracted and labeled with its English counterpart .
The English counterpart 's head and its immediate sub-structures ' heads serve as the input in a sample of VP association , and the German f-structure 's head become the output of the association .
For the above example , the association  is a sample drawn from the f-structures for the VP network .
The training samples for all the other networks are created in the same way .
The accuracy of our system with information-theoretical network lexical selection is lower than the one with back-propagation networks ( around 84 % versus around 92 % ) for the training data .
However , the generalization performance on the unseen inputs is better ( around 70 % versus around 62 % ) .
The information-theoretical networks do not over-learn as the back-propagation networks .
This is partially due to the reduced number of free parameters in the information-theoretical networks .
The lexical selection approach discussed here has two advantages .
First , it is learnable .
Little human effort on knowledge engineering is required .
Secondly , it is psycholinguistically well-founded in that the approach adopts a local activation processing model instead of relies upon symbol passing , as symbolic systems usually do .
