We argue that the resource sharing that is commonly manifest in semantic accounts of coordination is instead appropriately handled in terms of structure-sharing in LFG f-structures .
We provide an extension to the previous account of LFG semantics Dalrymple et al. 1993b according to which dependencies between f-structures are viewed as resources ; as a result a one-to-one correspondence between uses of f-structures and meanings is maintained .
The resulting system is sufficiently restricted in cases where other approaches overgenerate ; the very property of resource-sensitivity for which resource sharing appears to be problematic actually provides explanatory advantages over systems that more freely replicate resources during derivation .
The resource-based approach to semantic composition in Lexical-Functional Grammar ( LFG ) obtains the interpretation for a phrase via a logical deduction , beginning with the interpretations of its parts as premises Dalrymple et al. 1993b .
The resource-sensitive system of linear logic is used to compute meanings in accordance with relationships manifest in LFG f-structures .
The properties of the system ensure that meanings are used exactly once , allowing coherence and completeness conditions on f-structures Kaplan and Bresnan 1982 , to be maintained .
However , there are cases where a single constituent appears to yield more than one contribution to the meaning of an utterance .
This is most obvious in , but is not limited to , sentences involving coordination .
In example  , for instance , NAFTA is the object of two different verbs :
Since the hallmark of the linear logic approach is to ensure that f-structure contributions are utilized exactly once in a derivation , such constructions would at first glance appear to be problematic for the approach .
We argue that the resource sharing that is commonly manifest in the treatment of coordination in other approaches is appropriately handled by exploiting the structure-sharing in LFG f-structures .
We refine our previous analysis to account for cases where an f-structure is reached by multiple paths from an enclosing f-structure .
Dalrymple et al. 1993b provides an account of LFG semantics that represents the meaning of lexical items with linear logic formulas .
These formulas manipulate basic assertions of the form  , for f-structures f and meaning logic terms M .
Here  is a mapping , the semantic projection , that relates f-structures to semantic structures .
To distinguish between multiple paths entering an f-structure , we now take  to map from sets of paths in f-structures to semantic structures .
Further , the paths between f-structures are made available in the semantic space as resources .
This makes it possible for the semantic formulas to exploit information about the multiple paths into an f-structure in order to account for the multiple uses of the f-structure 's semantic contribution .
The resulting system is sufficiently restricted in cases where other approaches overgenerate ; the very property of resource-sensitivity for which resource sharing appears to be problematic actually provides explanatory advantages over systems that more freely replicate resources during derivation .
In Section  , we review previous approaches to the semantics of coordination and argument sharing , and make note of some of their drawbacks .
We describe the revised semantic framework in Section  , and work through several examples of non-constituent coordination ( specifically , right-node raising ) in Section  .
We discuss examples involving intensional verbs in Section  .
Steedman Steedman 1985 , Steedman 1989 , Steedman 1990 , working in the framework of Combinatory Categorial Grammar ( CCG ) , presents what is probably the most adequate analysis of non-constituent coordination to date .
As noted by Steedman and discussed by Oehrle 1990 , the addition of the rule of function composition to the inventory of syntactic rules in Categorial Grammar enables the formation of constituents with right-peripheral gaps , providing a basis for a clean treatment of cases of right node raising as exemplified by sentence  .
Such examples are handled by a coordination schema which allows like categories to be conjoined , shown in  .
This schema gives rise to various actual rules whose semantics depends on the number of arguments that the shared material takes .
For the cases of RNR considered here , the rule has the form shown in  .
The contraction from  and  to  in this rule allows for the single argument to be utilized twice .
As noted by Hudson 1976 , however , not all examples of RNR involve coordinate structures :
Obviously , such cases fall outside of the purview of the coordination schema .
An analysis for this sentence is available in the CCG framework by the addition of the xsubstitute combinator Steedman , as defined in Steedman 1987 .
The use of this combinator assimilates cases of noncoordinate RNR to cases involving parasitic gaps .
While this approach has some drawbacks , we do not offer a competing analysis of the syntax of sentences like  here .
Rather , we seek an analysis of RNR ( and of resource sharing in general ) that is uniform in the semantics ; such a treatment isn't available in CCG because of its tight integration between syntax and semantics .
Perhaps the most influential and widely-adopted semantic treatment of coordination is the approach of Partee and Rooth 1983 .
They propose a generalized conjunction scheme in which conjuncts of the same type can be combined .
As is the case with Steedman 's operators , contraction inherent in the schema allows for a single shared argument to be distributed as an argument of each conjunct .
Type-lifting is allowed to produce like types when necessary ; the combination of the coordination scheme and type-lifting can have the effect of ` copying ' an argument of higher type , such as a quantifier in the case of coordinated intensional verbs .
They propose a ` processing strategy ' requiring that expressions are interpreted at the lowest possible type , with type-raising taking place only where necessary .
To illustrate , Partee and Rooth assume that extensional verbs such as find are entered in the lexicon with basic type  , whereas intensional verbs like want , which require a quantifier as an argument , have type  ( ignoring intensionality ) .
Two extensional verbs such as find and support are coordinated at their basic types :
Two intensional verbs such as want and seek are also coordinated at their basic ( higher ) types :
The argument to this expression is a quantified NP .
When an intensional and an extensional verb are coordinated , the extensional verb must be type-raised to promote it to the type of the intensional verb :
Again , this leads to the desired result .
However , an unwelcome consequence of this approach , which appears to have gone unnoticed in the literature , arises in cases in which more than two verbs are conjoined .
If an intensional verb is coordinated with more than one extensional verb , a copy of the quantifier will be distributed to each verb in the coordinate structure .
For instance , in  , two extensional verbs and an intensional verb are coordinated .
Application of this expression to a quantifier results in two quantifiers being scoped separately over the extensional verbs .
This is the wrong result ; in a sentence such as ` Hillary wanted , found , and supported two candidates ' , the desired result is where one quantifier scopes over both extensional verbs ( that is , Hillary found and supported the same two candidates ) , just as in the case where all the verbs are extensional .
Further , there does not seem to be an obvious way to modify the Partee and Rooth proposal so as to produce the correct result , the problem being that the ability to copy quantifiers inherent in their schema is too unrestricted .
A second problem with the account is that , as with Steedman 's coordination schema , Partee and Rooth 's type-raising strategy only applies to coordinate structures .
However , the need to type-raise extends to cases not involving coordination , as in sentence  .
We will present an analysis that preserves the intuition underlying Partee and Rooth 's processing strategy , but that predicts and generates the correct reading for cases such as  .
Furthermore , the account applies equally to examples not involving coordination , as is the case in sentence  .
LFG assumes two syntactic levels of representation : constituent structure ( c-structure ) encodes phrasal dominance and precedence relations , and functional structure ( f-structure ) encodes syntactic predicate-argument structure .
The f-structure for sentence  is given in  :
Lexical entries specify syntactic constraints on f-structures as well as semantic information :
a meaning language and
a language for assembling meanings , or glue language .
The meaning language could be that of any appropriate logic ; for present purposes , higher-order logic will suffice .
Expressions of the meaning language ( such as Bill ) appear on the right side of the meaning relation  .
The glue language is the tensor fragment of linear logic Girard 1987 .
The semantic contribution of each lexical entry , which we will refer to as a meaning constructor , is a linear-logic formula consisting of instructions in the glue language for combining the meanings of the lexical entry 's syntactic arguments to obtain the meaning of the f-structure headed by the entry .
For instance , the meaning constructor for the verb supported is a glue language formula paraphrasable as : `` If my SUBJ means X and (  ) my OBJ means Y , then (  ) my sentence means  '' .
In the system described in Dalrymple et al. 1993b , the  relation associates expressions in the meaning language with f-structures .
As a result , each f-structure contributed a single meaning constructor as a resource to be used in a derivation .
Because linear logic does not have any form of logical contraction ( as is inherent in the approaches discussed earlier ) , cases where resources are shared appear to be problematic in this framework .
Intuitively , however , the need for the multiple use of an f-structure meaning results not from the appearance of a particular lexical item ( e.g. , a conjunction ) or a particular syntactic construction ( e.g. , parasitic gap constructions ) , but instead results from multiple paths to it from within the f-structure that contains it , where structure sharing is motivated on syntactic grounds .
We therefore revise the earlier framework to model what we will term occurrences of f-structures as resources explicitly in the logic .
F-structures can mathematically be regarded as ( finite ) functions from a set of attributes to a set of atomic values , semantic forms and ( recursively ) f-structures .
We will identify an occurrence of an f-structure with a path ( from the root ) to that occurrence ; sets of occurrences of an f-structure can therefore be identified with path sets in the f-structure .
We take , then , the domain of the  projection to be path sets in the root f-structure .
Only those path sets S are considered which satisfy the property that the extensions of each path in S are identical .
Therefore the f-structure reached by each of these paths is identical .
Hence from a path set S , we can read off an f-structure  .
In the examples discussed in Dalrymple et al. 1993b there is a one-to-one correspondence between the set of path sets S and the set of f-structures  picked out by such path sets , so the two methods yield the same predictions for those cases .
Relations between path sets are represented explicitly as resources in the logic by R-relations .
R-relations are represented as three-place predicates of the form  which indicate that ( the path set ) G appears at the end of a path P ( of length 1 ) extending ( the path set ) F .
That is , the f-structure  appears at the end of the singleton path P in the f-structure  .
For example , the f-structure given in  results in two R-relations :
Because f and g represent path sets entering an f-structure that they label , R-relation  ) indicates that the set of paths  ( which denotes the set of paths f concatenated with SUBJ ) is a subset of the set of paths denoted by g .
An axiom for interpretation provides the links between meanings of path sets related by R-relations .
According to this axiom , if a set of paths G has meaning X , then for each R-relation  that has been introduced , a resource  can be produced .
The linear logic operator ` ! ' allows the conclusion  to be used as many times as necessary : once for each R-relation R ( F , P , G ) introduced by the f-structure .
We show how a deduction can be performed to derive a meaning for example  using the meaning constructors in  , R-relations  and  , and Axiom I.
Instantiating the lexical entries for Bill , NAFTA , and supported according to the labels on the f-structure in  , we obtain the following premises :
First , combining Axiom I with the contribution for Bill yields :
This formula states that if a path set is R-related to the ( path set corresponding to the ) f-structure for Bill , then it receives Bill as its meaning .
From R-relation  ) and formula  , we derive  , giving the meaning of the subject of f
The meaning constructor for supported combines with  to derive the formula for bill-supported shown in  .
Similarly , using the meaning of NAFTA , R-relation  , and Axiom I , we can derive the meaning shown in  :
and combine it with  to derive  :
At each step , universal instantiation and modus ponens are used .
A second derivation is also possible , in which supported and NAFTA are combined first and the result is then combined with Bill .
The use of linear logic provides a flexible mechanism for deducing meanings of sentences based on their f-structure representations .
Accounts of various linguistic phenomena have been developed within the framework on which our extension is based , including quantifiers and anaphora Dalrymple et al. 1994a , intensional verbs Dalrymple et al. 1994b , and complex predicates Dalrymple et al. 1993a .
The logic fits well with the ` resource-sensitivity ' of natural language semantics : there is a one-to-one correspondence between f-structure relationships and meanings ; the multiple use of resources arises from multiple paths to them in the f-structure .
In the next section , we show how this system applies to several cases of right-node raising .
First we consider the derivation of the basic case of right-node raising ( RNR ) illustrated in sentence  , repeated in  .
The f-structure for example  is shown in  .
The meaning constructors contributed by the lexical items are as follows :
Here , we treat and as a binary relation .
This suffices for this example , but in general we will have to allow for cases where more than two constituents are conjoined .
Therefore , a second meaning constructor and 2 is also contributed by the appearance of and , prefixed with the linear logic operator ` ! ' , so that it may be used as many times as necessary ( and possibly not at all , as is the case in this example ) .
The R-relations resulting from the feature-value relationships manifest in the f-structure in  are :
There are several equivalent derivation orders ; here we step through one .
Using the meanings for Bill , supported , Hillary , and opposed , R-relations  and  , and Axiom I , we can derive meanings for Bill supported and Hillary opposed in the fashion described in Section  :
We combine the antecedents and consequents of the foregoing formulae to yield :
Consuming the meaning of and and R-relations [CREF) and  , and using Axiom I , we derive :
Using Axiom  and R-relations  and  , the following implication can be derived :
Using these last two formulae , by transitivity we obtain :
Finally , consuming the contribution of NAFTA , by universal instantiation and modus ponens we obtain a meaning for the whole sentence :
At this stage , all accountable resources have been consumed , and the deduction is complete .
We now consider sentence  , where a quantified NP is shared .
Partee and Rooth 1983 observe , and we agree , that the quantifier in such cases only scopes once , resulting in the reading where Bill supported and Hillary opposed the same two bills .
Our analysis predicts this fact in the same way as Partee and Rooth 's analysis does .
The meanings contributed by the lexical items and f-structure dependencies are the same as in the previous example , except for that of the object NP .
Following Dalrymple et al. 1994a , the meaning derived using the contributions from an f-structure h for two trade bills is :
The derivation is just as before , up until the final step , where we have derived the formula labeled bill-supported-and-hillary-opposed 2 .
This formula matches the antecedent of the quantified NP meaning , so by universal instantiation and modus ponens we derive :
With this derivation , there is only one quantifier meaning which scopes over the meaning of the coordinated material .
A result where the quantifier meaning appears twice , scoping over each conjunct separately , is not available with the rules we have given thus far ; we return to this point in Section  .
The analysis readily extends to cases of noncoordinate RNR such as example  , repeated as example  .
In our analysis , the f-structure for two trade bills is resource-shared as the object of the two verbs , just as it is in the coordinated case .
Space limitations preclude our going through the derivation ; however , it is straightforward given the semantic contributions of the lexical items and R-relations .
The fact that there is no coordination involved has no bearing on the result , since the semantics of resource-sharing is distinct from that of coordination in our analysis .
As previously noted , this separation is not possible in CCG because of the tight integration between syntax and semantics .
In LFG , the syntax / semantics interface is more loosely coupled , affording the flexibility to handle coordinated and non-coordinated cases of RNR uniformly in the semantics .
This also allows for our semantics of coordination not to require schemas nor entities of polymorphic type ; our meaning of and is type  .
We now return to consider cases involving intensional verbs .
The preferred reading for sentence  , in which only one quantifier scopes over the two extensional predicates , is shown below :
The f-structure for example  is given in  .
The meaning constructors for the lexical items are given in Figure  .
Recall that a second meaning constructor and 2 is introduced by and in order to handle cases where there are more than two conjuncts ; this contribution will be used once in the derivation of the meaning for sentence  .
The following R-relations result from the f-structural relationships :
Following the analysis given in Dalrymple et al. 1994b , the lexical entry for want takes a quantified NP as an argument .
This requires that the quantified NP meaning be duplicated , since otherwise no readings result .
We provide a special rule for duplicating quantified NPs when necessary :
In the interest of space , again we only show a few steps of the derivation .
Combining the meanings for Hillary , found , supported , and and , Axiom I , and R-relations  ,  ,  ,  ,  , and  , we can derive :
We duplicate the meaning of two candidates using QNP Duplication , and combine one copy with the foregoing formula to yield :
We then combine the other meaning of two candidates with the meanings of Hillary and wanted , and using Axiom I and R-relations  ) ,  , and  we obtain :
Finally , using and 2 with the two foregoing formulae , we deduce the desired result :
We can now specify a Partee and Rooth style processing strategy , which is to prefer readings which require the least use of QNP duplication .
This strategy predicts the readings generated for the examples in Section  .
It also predicts the desired reading for sentence  , since that reading requires two quantifiers .
While the reading generated by Partee and Rooth is derivable , it requires three quantifiers and thus uses QNP duplication twice , which is less preferred than the reading requiring two quantifiers which uses QNP duplication once .
Also , it allows some flexibility in cases where pragmatics strongly suggests that quantifiers are copied and distributed for multiple extensional verbs ; unlike the Partee and Rooth account , this would apply equally to the case where there are also intensional verbs and the case where there are not .
Finally , our account readily applies to cases of intensional verbs without coordination as in example  , since it applies more generally to cases of resource sharing .
We have given an account of resource sharing in the syntax / semantics interface of LFG .
The multiple use of semantic contributions results from viewing dependencies in f-structures as resources ; in this way the one-to-one correspondence between f-structure relations and meanings is maintained .
The resulting account does not suffer from overgeneration inherent in other approaches , and applies equally to cases of resource sharing that do not involve coordination .
Furthermore , it lends itself readily to an extension for the intensional verb case that has advantages over the widely-assumed account of Partee and Rooth 1983 .
Here we have separated the issue of arriving at the appropriate f-structure in the syntax from the issue of deriving the correct semantics from the f-structure .
We have argued that this is the correct distinction to make , and have given a treatment of the second issue .
A treatment of the first issue will be articulated in a future forum .
