Both anaphora resolution and prepositional phrase ( PP ) attachment are the most frequent ambiguities in natural language processing .
Several methods have been proposed to deal with each phenomenon separately , however none of proposed systems has considered the way of dealing both phenomena .
We tackle this issue here , proposing an algorithm to co-ordinate the treatment of these two problems efficiently , i.e. , the aim is also to exploit at each step all the results that each component can provide .
Several methods have been proposed to deal with anaphora resolution and prepositional phrase ( PP ) attachment phenomenon and separately , so that the literature is very abundant : for PPs see e.g. , Frazier and Fodor 1979 , Hobbs 1990 , Wilks and Huang 1985 ) , and for anaphora see e.g. , Carter 1986 , Reinhart 1983 , Sidner 1983 .
However none of these methods has considered the way of dealing both phenomena in the same concrete system .
We propose in this paper an algorithm that deals with both phenomena , in the same analyser .
The anaphora module pertains to the recent methods , uses a set of resolution rules based on the focusing approach Sidner 1983 .
These rules are applied to the conceptual representation and their output is a set of candidate antecedents .
Concerning the PPs , unattached prepositions involve empty or unfilled roles in the Conceptual Structures ( CSs ) , expressed in a frame-based language Zarri 1992 .
The disambiguation procedure aims at filling the empty roles using attachment rules .
This work was accomplished in the context of COBALT project ( LRE 61 - 011 ) , dealing with financial news .
A detailed discussion about both procedures of anaphora resolution and PP attachment is largely developed in Azzam 1994 .
Two of the main principles of the algorithm are :
This is because the resolution rules may have an empty role as a parameter , due to this unattached preposition .
The resolution of the anaphor is then postponed to the second phase of anaphora resolution .
The proposed procedure is based on successive calls to the anaphora module and to the PP attachment module .
The output of each call is a set of CSs that represent the intermediate results exchanged between each call and on which both modules operate in turn .
The aim is to fill the unfilled roles in the CSs , due to anaphora or unattached PPs. To summarize the algorithm is :
The order in which the two modules are called is based on efficiency deduced from statistical data performed on COBALT corpuses .
Three main cases are faced by the algorithm :
When the anaphor occurs before a given preposition in the sentence , its resolution does not depend on where the preposition is to be attached ( except for cataphors that are quite rare ) .
In this case the anaphora module can be applied before the attachment procedure .
The example  below shows that the resolution of the anaphoric pronoun that must be performed first and that the PP starting with of be attached later .
When the anaphor occurs after one or several unattached prepositions , it could be an intra-sentential anaphor ( i.e. referring to an entity in the same sentence ) , then its resolution may depend on one of the previous prepositional phrases .
In this case , the resolution of the anaphora is postponed to a next call of the anaphora module according to principle  stated above .
When the anaphor is included in a PP ( particular case of  ) , PP attachment rules need semantic information about the `` object '' of the PP ; when it is a pronoun , no semantic information is available , so that the attachment rules can not be applied .
The anaphoric pronouns have to be resolved first , so as to determine what semantic class they refer to ; the PP attachment procedure can then be applied .
When a sequence contains more than two such PPs , i.e. , with anaphors as objects , the length of a cycle is more than 4 .
The pronoun its can not be resolved by the anaphora resolution module because it is preceded by unattached PPs ; its resolution is skipped .
The PP attachment procedure is then called to determine the attachment of since and at while the object of the in PP comprises an anaphoric pronoun its ( case  ) and the on PP is preceded by its .
The attachment of both PPs is then skipped .
The anaphora module is called again to resolve the anaphoric pronoun its , which is possible , in this example , since the previous PPs have been attached and there is no anaphors before .
Finally , the PP attachment procedure has to be called again for the in and on PPs .
Notice that even if each module is called several times , there is no redundancy in the processing .
The algorithm should be considered as the splitting of both anaphora resolution and PP attachment procedures into several phases and not as the repetition of each procedure .
The objective was to emphasise more than it has been done until now , the fact that PP attachment and anaphora resolution could interact in the same system in order to produce a complete conceptual analysis , instead of slowing down each other .
The algorithm we proposed in this paper , is independent of the used approaches in both anaphora and attachment modules .
It concerns rather the way of managing the interaction between the two modules .
Our actual work addresses more the problems inside each module .
The attachment module has been implemented at 99 % .
Presently we are working on the extension of the anaphora module particularly to deal also with the anaphoric definite noun phrases .
