Drawing appropriate defeasible inferences has been proven to be one of the most pervasive puzzles of natural language processing and a recurrent problem in pragmatics .
This paper provides a theoretical framework , called stratified logic , that can accommodate defeasible pragmatic inferences .
The framework yields an algorithm that computes the conversational , conventional , scalar , clausal , and normal state implicatures ; and the presuppositions that are associated with utterances .
The algorithm applies equally to simple and complex utterances and sequences of utterances .
It is widely acknowledged that a full account of natural language utterances cannot be given in terms of only syntactic or semantic phenomena .
For example , Hirschberg 1985 has shown that in order to understand a scalar implicature , one must analyze the conversants ' beliefs and intentions .
To recognize normal state implicatures one must consider mutual beliefs and plans Green 1990 .
To understand conversational implicatures associated with indirect replies one must consider discourse expectations , discourse plans , and discourse relations Green 1992, Green and Carberry 1994 .
Some presuppositions are inferrable when certain lexical constructs ( factives , aspectuals , etc ) or syntactic constructs ( cleft and pseudo-cleft sentences ) are used .
Despite all the complexities that individualize the recognition stage for each of these inferences , all of them can be defeated by context , by knowledge , beliefs , or plans of the agents that constitute part of the context , or by other pragmatic rules .
Defeasibility is a notion that is tricky to deal with , and scholars in logics and pragmatics have learned to circumvent it or live with it .
The first observers of the phenomenon preferred to keep defeasibility outside the mathematical world .
For Frege 1892 , Russell 1905 , and Quine 1949 `` everything exists '' ; therefore , in their logical systems , it is impossible to formalize the cancellation of the presupposition that definite referents exist Hirst 1991, Marcu and Hirst 1994 .
We can taxonomize previous approaches to defeasible pragmatic inferences into three categories ( we omit here work on defeasibility related to linguistic phenomena such as discourse , anaphora , or speech acts ) .
Most linguistic approaches account for the defeasibility of pragmatic inferences by analyzing them in a context that consists of all or some of the previous utterances , including the current one .
Context Karttunen 1974 , Kay 1992 , procedural rules Gazdar 1979 , Karttunen and Peters 1979 , lexical and syntactic structure Weischedel 1979 , intentions Hirschberg 1985 , or anaphoric constraints Sandt 1992 , Zeevat 1992 decide what presuppositions or implicatures are projected as pragmatic inferences for the utterance that is analyzed .
The problem with these approaches is that they assign a dual life to pragmatic inferences : in the initial stage , as members of a simple or complex utterance , they are defeasible .
However , after that utterance is analyzed , there is no possibility left of cancelling that inference .
But it is natural to have implicatures and presuppositions that are inferred and cancelled as a sequence of utterances proceeds : research in conversation repairs Hirst et al. 1994 abounds in such examples .
We address this issue in more detail in section  .
One way of accounting for cancellations that occur later in the analyzed text is simply to extend the boundaries within which pragmatic inferences are evaluated , i.e. , to look ahead a few utterances .
Green 1992 assumes that implicatures are connected to discourse entities and not to utterances , but her approach still does not allow cancellations across discourse units .
Another way of allowing pragmatic inferences to be cancelled is to assign them the status of defeasible information .
Mercer 1987 formalizes presuppositions in a logical framework that handles defaults Reiter 1980 , but this approach is not tractable and it treats natural disjunction as an exclusive-or and implication as logical equivalence .
Computational approaches fail to account for the cancellation of pragmatic inferences : once presuppositions Weischedel 1979 or implicatures Hirschberg 1985 , Green 1992 are generated , they can never be cancelled .
We are not aware of any formalism or computational approach that offers a unified explanation for the cancellability of pragmatic inferences in general , and of no approach that handles cancellations that occur in sequences of utterances .
It is our aim to provide such an approach here .
In doing this , we assume the existence , for each type of pragmatic inference , of a set of necessary conditions that must be true in order for that inference to be triggered .
Once such a set of conditions is met , the corresponding inference is drawn , but it is assigned a defeasible status .
It is the role of context and knowledge of the conversants to `` decide '' whether that inference will survive or not as a pragmatic inference of the structure .
We put no boundaries upon the time when such a cancellation can occur , and we offer a unified explanation for pragmatic inferences that are inferable when simple utterances , complex utterances , or sequences of utterances are considered .
We propose a new formalism , called `` stratified logic '' , that correctly handles the pragmatic inferences , and we start by giving a very brief introduction to the main ideas that underlie it .
We give the main steps of the algorithm that is defined on the backbone of stratified logic .
We then show how different classes of pragmatic inferences can be captured using this formalism , and how our algorithm computes the expected results for a representative class of pragmatic inferences .
The results we report here are obtained using an implementation written in Common Lisp that uses Screamer Siskind and McAllester 1993 , a macro package that provides nondeterministic constructs .
We can offer here only a brief overview of stratified logic .
The reader is referred to Marcu 1994 for a comprehensive study .
Stratified logic supports one type of indefeasible information and two types of defeasible information , namely , infelicitously defeasible and felicitously defeasible .
The notion of infelicitously defeasible information is meant to capture inferences that are anomalous to cancel , as in :
The notion of felicitously defeasible information is meant to capture the inferences that can be cancelled without any abnormality , as in :
The lattice in figure  underlies the semantics of stratified logic .
The lattice depicts the three levels of strength that seem to account for the inferences that pertain to natural language semantics and pragmatics : indefeasible information belongs to the u layer , infelicitously defeasible information belongs to the i layer , and felicitously defeasible information belongs to the d layer .
Each layer is partitioned according to its polarity in truth ,  , and falsity ,  .
The lattice shows a partial order that is defined over the different levels of truth .
For example , something that is indefeasibly false ,  , is stronger ( in a sense to be defined below ) than something that is infelicitously defeasibly true ,  , or felicitously defeasibly false ,  .
Formally , we say that the u level is stronger than the i level , which is stronger than the d level :  .
At the syntactic level , we allow atomic formulas to be labelled according to the same underlying lattice .
Compound formulas are obtained in the usual way .
This will give us formulas such as  , or  .
The satisfaction relation is split according to the three levels of truth into u-satisfaction , i-satisfaction , and d-satisfaction :
Definition  extends in a natural way to negated and compound formulas .
Having a satisfaction definition associated with each level of strength provides a high degree of flexibility .
The same theory can be interpreted from a perspective that allows more freedom ( u-satisfaction ) , or from a perspective that is tighter and that signals when some defeasible information has been cancelled ( i - and d-satisfaction ) .
Possible interpretations of a given set of utterances with respect to a knowledge base are computed using an extension of the semantic tableau method .
This extension has been proved to be both sound and complete Marcu 1994 .
A partial ordering ,  , determines the set of optimistic interpretations for a theory .
An interpretation  is preferred to , or is more optimistic than , an interpretation  (  ) if it contains more information and that information can be more easily updated in the future .
That means that if an interpretation  makes an utterance true by assigning to a relation R a defeasible status , while another interpretation  makes the same utterance true by assigning the same relation R a stronger status ,  will be the preferred or optimistic one , because it is as informative as  and it allows more options in the future ( R can be defeated ) .
Pragmatic inferences are triggered by utterances .
To differentiate between them and semantic inferences , we introduce a new quantifier ,  , whose semantics is defined such that a pragmatic inference of the form  is instantiated only for those objects  from the universe of discourse that pertain to an utterance having the form  .
Hence , only if the antecedent of a pragmatic rule has been uttered can that rule be applied .
A meta-logical construct uttered applies to the logical translation of utterances .
This theory yields the following definition :
Our algorithm , described in detail by Marcu 1994 , takes as input a set of first-order stratified formulas  that represents an adequate knowledge base that expresses semantic knowledge and the necessary conditions for triggering pragmatic inferences , and the translation of an utterance or set of utterances uttered ( u ) .
The algorithm builds the set of all possible interpretations for a given utterance , using a generalization of the semantic tableau technique .
The model-ordering relation filters the optimistic interpretations .
Among them , the defeasible inferences that have been triggered on pragmatic grounds are checked to see whether or not they are cancelled in any optimistic interpretation .
Those that are not cancelled are labelled as pragmatic inferences for the given utterance or set of utterances .
We present a set of examples that covers a representative group of pragmatic inferences .
In contrast with most other approaches , we provide a consistent methodology for computing these inferences and for determining whether they are cancelled or not for all possible configurations : simple and complex utterances and sequences of utterances .
A factive such as the verb regret presupposes its complement , but as we have seen , in positive environments , the presupposition is stronger : it is acceptable to defeat a presupposition triggered in a negative environment  , but is infelicitous to defeat one that belongs to a positive environment  .
Therefore , an appropriate formalization of utterance  and the requisite pragmatic knowledge will be as shown in  .
The stratified semantic tableau that corresponds to theory  is given in figure  .
The tableau yields two model schemata ( see figure  ) ; in both of them , it is defeasibly inferred that Mary came to the party .
The model-ordering relation  establishes  as the optimistic model for the theory because it contains as much information as  and is easier to defeat .
Model  explains why Mary came to the party is a presupposition for utterance  .
Consider utterance  , and its implicatures  .
An appropriate formalization is given in  , where the second formula captures the defeasible scalar implicatures and the third formula reflects the relevant semantic information for all .
The theory provides one optimistic model schema ( figure  ) that reflects the expected pragmatic inferences , i.e. , ( Not most / Not many / Not all ) of the boys went to the theatre .
Assume now , that after a moment of thought , the same person utters :
By adding the extra utterance to the initial theory  , uttered ( went ( all ( boys ) , theatre ) ) , one would obtain one optimistic model schema in which the conventional implicatures have been cancelled ( see figure  ) .
The Achilles heel for most theories of presupposition has been their vulnerability to the projection problem .
Our solution for the projection problem does not differ from a solution for individual utterances .
Consider the following utterances and some of their associated presuppositions  ( the symbol  precedes an inference drawn on pragmatic grounds ) :
Chris is not a bachelor presupposes that Chris is a male adult ; Chris regrets that Mary came to the party presupposes that Mary came to the party .
There is no contradiction between these two presuppositions , so one would expect a conversant to infer both of them if she hears an utterance such as  .
However , when one examines utterance  , one observes immediately that there is a contradiction between the presuppositions carried by the individual components .
Being a bachelor presupposes that Chris is a male , while being a spinster presupposes that Chris is a female .
Normally , we would expect a conversant to notice this contradiction and to drop each of these elementary presuppositions when she interprets  .
We now study how stratified logic and the model-ordering relation capture one 's intuitions .
An appropriate formalization for utterance  and the necessary semantic and pragmatic knowledge is given in  .
Besides the translation of the utterance , the initial theory contains a formalization of the defeasible implicature that natural disjunction is used as an exclusive or , the knowledge that Mary is not a name for males , the lexical semantics for the word bachelor , and the lexical pragmatics for bachelor and regret .
The stratified semantic tableau generates 12 model schemata .
Only four of them are kept as optimistic models for the utterance .
The models yield Mary came to the party ; Chris is a male ; and Chris is an adult as pragmatic inferences of utterance  .
Consider now utterance  .
The stratified semantic tableau that corresponds to its logical theory yields 16 models , but only Chris is an adult satisfies definition  and is projected as presupposition for the utterance .
We have already mentioned that speech repairs constitute a good benchmark for studying the generation and cancellation of pragmatic inferences along sequences of utterances McRoy and Hirst 1993 .
Suppose , for example , that Jane has two friends -- John Smith and John Pevler -- and that her roommate Mary has met only John Smith , a married fellow .
Assume now that Jane has a conversation with Mary in which Jane mentions only the name John because she is not aware that Mary does not know about the other John , who is a five-year-old boy .
In this context , it is natural for Mary to become confused and to come to wrong conclusions .
For example , Mary may reply that John is not a bachelor .
Although this is true for both Johns , it is more appropriate for the married fellow than for the five-year-old boy .
Mary knows that John Smith is a married male , so the utterance makes sense for her .
At this point Jane realizes that Mary misunderstands her : all the time Jane was talking about John Pevler , the five-year-old boy .
The utterances in  constitute a possible answer that Jane may give to Mary in order to clarify the problem .
The first utterance in the sequence presupposes  .
Utterance  warns Mary that is very likely she misunderstood a previous utterance  .
The warning is conveyed by implicature .
At this point , the hearer , Mary , starts to believe that one of her previous utterances has been elaborated on a false assumption , but she does not know which one .
The third utterance  comes to clarify the issue .
It explicitly expresses that John is not an adult .
Therefore , it cancels the early presupposition  :
Note that there is a gap of one statement between the generation and the cancellation of this presupposition .
The behavior described is mirrored both by our theory and our program .
The same methodology can be applied to modeling conversational implicatures in indirect replies Green 1992 .
Green 's algorithm makes use of discourse expectations , discourse plans , and discourse relations .
The following dialog is considered Green 1992 :
Answer  conveys a `` yes '' , but a reply consisting only of  would implicate a `` no '' .
As Green notices , in previous models of implicatures Gazdar 1979 , Hirschberg 1985 , processing (  will block the implicature generated by  .
Green solves the problem by extending the boundaries of the analysis to discourse units .
Our approach does not exhibit these constraints .
As in the previous example , the one dealing with a sequence of utterances , we obtain a different interpretation after each step .
When the question is asked , there is no conversational implicature .
Answer  makes the necessary conditions for implicating `` no '' true , and the implication is computed .
Answer  reinforces a previous condition .
Answer  makes the preconditions for implicating a `` no '' false , and the preconditions for implicating a `` yes '' true .
Therefore , the implicature at the end of the dialogue is that the conversant who answered went shopping .
Unlike most research in pragmatics that focuses on certain types of presuppositions or implicatures , we provide a global framework in which one can express all these types of pragmatic inferences .
Each pragmatic inference is associated with a set of necessary conditions that may trigger that inference .
When such a set of conditions is met , that inference is drawn , but it is assigned a defeasible status .
An extended definition of satisfaction and a notion of `` optimism '' with respect to different interpretations yield the preferred interpretations for an utterance or sequences of utterances .
These interpretations contain the pragmatic inferences that have not been cancelled by context or conversant 's knowledge , plans , or intentions .
The formalism yields an algorithm that has been implemented in Common Lisp with Screamer .
This algorithm computes uniformly pragmatic inferences that are associated with simple and complex utterances and sequences of utterances , and allows cancellations of pragmatic inferences to occur at any time in the discourse .
This research was supported in part by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada .
