We describe a method for analysing the temporal structure of a discourse which takes into account the effects of tense , aspect , temporal adverbials and rhetorical structure and which minimises unnecessary ambiguity in the temporal structure .
It is part of a discourse grammar implemented in Carpenter 's ALE formalism .
The method for building up the temporal structure of the discourse combines constraints and preferences : we use constraints to reduce the number of possible structures , exploiting the HPSG type hierarchy and unification for this purpose ; and we apply preferences to choose between the remaining options using a temporal centering mechanism .
We end by recommending that an underspecified representation of the structure using these techniques be used to avoid generating the temporal / rhetorical structure until higher-level information can be used to disambiguate .
In this paper we describe a method for analysing the temporal structure of a discourse .
This component was implemented as part of a discourse grammar for English .
The goals of the temporal component were to yield a detailed representation of the temporal structure of the discourse , taking into account the effect of tense , aspect and temporal expressions while at the same time minimising unnecessary ambiguity in the temporal structure .
The method combines a constraint-based approach with an approach based on preferences : we exploit the HPSG type hierarchy and unification to arrive at a temporal structure using constraints placed on that structure by tense , aspect , rhetorical structure and temporal expressions , and we use the temporal centering preferences described by Kameyama et al. 1993 , Poesio 1994 to rate the possibilities for temporal structure and choose the best among them .
The starting point for this work was Scha and Polanyi 's discourse grammar Scha and Polanyi 1988 , Pruest et al. 1994 .
For the implementation we extended the HPSG grammar Pollard and Sag 1994 which Gerald Penn and Bob Carpenter first encoded in ALE Carpenter 1993 .
This paper will focus on our temporal processing algorithm , and in particular on our analysis of narrative progression , rhetorical structure , perfects and temporal expressions .
Probably the best known algorithm for tracking narrative progression is that developed by Kamp 1979 , Hinrichs 1981 , and Partee 1984 , which formalises the observation that an event will occur just after a preceding event , while a state will overlap with a preceding event .
This algorithm gives the correct results in examples such as the following :
In  the event of Mary 's standing is understood to occur just after John enters the room , while in  the state in which Mary is seated is understood to overlap with the event of John 's entering the room .
However , if there is a rhetorical relationship between two eventualities such as causation , elaboration or enablement , the temporal defaults can be overridden , as in the following examples :
In  there is a causal relationship between Mary 's pushing John and his falling , and the second event is understood to precede the first .
In  , the second sentence is an elaboration of the first , and they therefore refer to aspects of the same event rather than to two sequential events .
It has been suggested that only world knowledge allows one to detect that the default is being overridden here .
For example , Lascarides and Asher 1991 suggest that general knowledge postulates ( in the case of  : that a pushing can cause a falling ) can be invoked to generate the backward movement reading .
The problem for practical systems is twofold : we could assume that in the case of narrative the Kamp / Hinrichs / Partee algorithm is the default , but each time the default is applied we would need to check all our available world knowledge to see whether there isn't a world knowledge postulate which might be overriding this assumption .
Clearly this would make the processing of text a very expensive operation .
An alternative is to assume that the temporal ordering between events in two consecutive sentences can be any of the four possibilities ( just_after , precede , same-event and overlap ) .
But then the resulting temporal structures will be highly ambiguous even in small discourses .
And sometimes this ambiguity is unwarranted .
Consider :
Here , it would appear , only one reading is possible , i.e. the one where John gave Mary her slice of pizza just after she stared or started to stare at him .
It would be undesirable for the temporal processing mechanism to postulate an ambiguity in this case .
Of course , sometimes it is possible to take advantage of certain cue words which either indicate or constrain the rhetorical relation .
For example , in  the order of the events is understood to be the reverse of that in  due to the cue word because which signals a causal relationship between the events :
As Kehler 1994a points out , if forward movement of time is considered a default with consecutive event sentences , then the use of `` because '' in  should cause a temporal clash -- whereas it is perfectly felicitous .
Temporal expressions such as at noon and the previous Thursday can have a similar effect : they too can override the default temporal relations and place constraints on tense
In  , for example , the default interpretation would be that John 's being in Detroit overlaps with his being in Boston , but the phrase the previous Thursday overrides this , giving the interpretation that John 's being in Detroit precedes his being in Boston :
This suggests that the temporal information given by tense acts as a weaker constraint on temporal structure than the information given by temporal adverbials .
The possibilities for rhetorical relations ( e.g. , whether something is narration , or elaboration , or a causal relation ) can be further constrained by aspect .
For example , a state can elaborate another state or an event :
But an event can only elaborate another event , as in  :
For the eventive second sentence of  to be an elaboration of the first sentence , it must occur in a stative form -- for example as a progressive ( i.e. , She was building a dog house ) .
Because of considerations like these , our aim in the implementation work was to treat tense , aspect , cue words and rhetorical relations as mutually constraining , with more specific information such as explicit cue words having higher priority than less specific information such as tense .
The main advantage of this approach is that it reduces temporal structure ambiguity without having to rely on detailed world knowledge postulates .
Table  lists the possible temporal relations between the eventualities described by two consecutive sentences without temporal expressions or cue words , where the first sentence ( S  ) may have any tense and aspect and the second sentence ( S  ) expresses a simple past event .
We constrain S  in this way because of lack of space ; additional constraints are given in Hitzeman et al. 1994 .
For example , if a simple past eventive sentence follows a simple past eventive sentence the second event can be understood to occur just after the first , to precede the first or to refer to the same event as the first ( an elaboration relation ) , but the two events cannot overlap ; these constraints are weaker , however , than explicit clues such as cue words to rhetorical relations and temporal expressions .
When S  expresses a state , it is possible for the temporal relation to hold between the event described by S  and the event or activity most closely preceding S  , i.e. , the temporal focus of S  , here referred to as TF  .
However , we haven't solved the problem completely at this point : although tense can provide a further constraint on the temporal structure of such discourses , it can also add a further ambiguity .
Consider  :
Clearly , the event described by the past perfect sentence must precede the event described by the first , simple past sentence .
However , if a third sentence is added , an ambiguity results .
Consider the following possible continuations of  :
The temporal relation between these continuations and the portion of earlier text they attach to is constrained along the lines sketched before .
The problem here is determining which thread in  they continue ;  continues the thread in which Sam rings the bell , but  continues the thread in which Sam loses the key .
A further ambiguity is that when the third sentence is past perfect , it may be a continuation of a preceding thread or the start of a new thread itself .
Consider :
In  the third sentence continues the thread about losing the key ; in  the third starts a new thread .
For the problem with multi-sentence discourses , and the `` threads '' that sentences continue , we use an implementation of temporal centering Kameyama et al. 1993, Poesio 1994 .
This is a technique similar to the type of centering used for nominal anaphora Sidner 1983, Grosz et al. 1983 .
Centering assumes that discourse understanding requires some notion of `` aboutness .
'' While nominal centering assumes there is one object that the current discourse is `` about , '' temporal centering assumes that there is one thread that the discourse is currently following , and that , in addition to tense and aspect constraints , there is a preference for a new utterance to continue a thread which has a parallel tense or which is semantically related to it and a preference to continue the current thread rather than switching to another thread .
Kameyama et al. 1993 confirmed these preferences when testing their ideas on the Brown corpus .
As an example of how the temporal centering preference techniques can reduce ambiguity , recall example  and the possible continuations shown in  .
The difficulty in these examples is determining whether the third sentence continues the thread begun by the first or second sentence .
For example , in  the preference technique which allows us to choose the first thread over the second is one which assigns a higher rating to a thread whose tense is parallel to that of the new sentence ; in this case both Sam rang the bell and Hannah opened the door are in the simple past tense .
In example  the fact that the key is mentioned only in the second sentence of  links  with the second thread .
To handle an example like third , we employ a preference for relating a sentence to a thread that has content words that are rated as semantically `` close '' to that of the sentence :
We store semantic patterns between words as a cheap and quick form of world knowledge ; these patterns are easier to provide than are the detailed world knowledge postulates required in some other approaches , and result in similar and sometimes more precise temporal structures with less processing overhead .
Using the semantic patterns we know that key and keyring are semantically close , and through that semantic link between the second and third sentences we prefer to connect the third sentence to the thread begun by the second .
The approach to representing semantic relationships we take is one used by Morris and Hirst wherein the words in the lexicon are associated with each other in a thesaurus-like fashion and given a rating according to how semantically `` close '' they are .
We thus avoid relying on high-level inferences and very specific world knowledge postulates , our goal being to determine the temporal structure as much as possible prior to the application of higher-level inferences .
Following Scha and Polanyi 1988 and Pruest et al. 1994 , our model of discourse consists of units called Discourse Constituent Units ( DCUs ) which are related by various temporal and rhetorical relations .
A basic DCU represents a sentence ( or clause ) , and complex DCUs are built up from basic and complex DCUs .
In our ALE implementation , a DCU contains the following slots for temporal information :
CUE_WORD : Cues to rhetorical structure , e.g. , `` because . ''
V_AND_NP_LIST : Contains content words found in this DCU , and is used to compare the content words of the current DCU with those in previous threads , in order to rate the semantic `` closeness '' of the DCU to each thread .
SEM_ASPECT : Contains the semantic aspect ( event , state , activity ) .
We have extended the Penn and Carpenter implementation of the HPSG grammar so that semantic aspect is calculated compositionally ( and stored here ) .
RHET_RELN : The relation between this DCU and a previous one .
Lexical items and phrases such as cue words ( stored in CUE_WORD ) affect the value of this slot .
TEMP_CENTER : Used for temporal centering ; Keeps track of the thread currently being followed ( since there is a preference for continuing the current thread ) and all the threads that have been constructed so far in the discourse .
FWD_CENTER : Existing threads
BKWD_CENTER : The thread currently being followed
CLOSED_THREADS : Threads no longer available for continuation .
TEMP_EXPR_RELNS : Stores the semantic interpretation of temporal expressions associated with this DCU .
TEMP_RELNS : Stores the temporal relations between the eventualities in the discourse .
TEMPFOC : The most recent event in the current thread which a subsequent eventuality may elaborate upon ( same-event ) , overlap , come just_after or precede .
TENASP : Keeps track of the tense and syntactic aspect of the DCU ( if the DCU is simple ) .
TENSE : past , pres , fut
ASPECT : simple , perf , prog , perf_prog .
To allow the above-mentioned types of information to mutually constrain each other , we employ a hierarchy of rhetorical and temporal relations ( illustrated in Figure  ) , using the ALE system in such a way that clues such as tense and cue words work together to reduce the number of possible temporal structures .
This approach improves upon earlier work on discourse structure such as Lascarides and Asher 1991 and Kehler 1994a in reducing the number of possible ambiguities ; it is also more precise than the Kamp / Hinrichs / Partee approach in that it takes into account ways in which the apparent defaults can be overridden and differentiates between events and activities , which behave differently in narrative progression .
Tense , aspect , rhetorical relations and temporal expressions affect the value of the RHET_RELN type that expresses the relationship between two DCUs : cue words are lexically marked according to what rhetorical relation they specify , and this relation is passed on to the DCU .
Explicit relation markers such as cue words and temporal relations must be consistent and take priority over indicators such as tense and aspect .
For example , sentence  will be ruled out because the cue phrase as a result conflicts with the temporal expression ten minutes earlier :
On the other hand , if temporal expressions indicate an overlap relation and cue words indicate a background relation as in  , these contributions are consistent and the RHET_RELN type will contain a background value ( the more specific value of the two ) :
For reasons of space it is difficult to give examples of the sign-based output of the grammar , or of the ALE rules , so we will restrict ourselves here to a summary of the algorithm and to a very limited rendition of the system output .
The algorithm used for calculating the temporal structure of a discourse can be summarised as follows .
It consists of two parts , the constraint-based portion and the preference-based portion :
The possible temporal / rhetorical relations are constrained .
If there is a temporal expression , it determines the temporal relationship of the new DCU to the previous ones , and defaults are ignored .
Lexical items such as cue words influence the value of the RHET_RELN type ( See Figure  ) .
If steps  and  attempt to place conflicting values in the RHET_RELN slot , the parse will fail .
If there is no temporal expression or cue phrase , tense and semantic aspect also influence the value of the RHET_RELN type ( See Table  ) , so that rhetorical relations , tense and aspect constrain each other .
If more than one possibility exists , semantic preferences are used to choose between the possibilities .
A `` semantic distance '' rating between the new DCU and each previous thread is determined .
( If there are no existing threads a new thread is started . )
Other preferences , such as a preference for relating the new DCU to a thread with parallel tense , are employed ( See Kameyama et al. 1993 , Poesio 1994 for details ) , and the resulting ratings are factored into the rating for each thread .
If the thread currently being followed is among the highest rated threads , this thread is continued .
( This corresponds to temporal centering 's preference to continue the current thread . )
If not , the DCU may continue any of the highest rated threads , and each of these solutions is generated .
Charts such as Table  provide the observations we use to fill in the value of RHET_RELN .
Those observations are summarised below .
In what follows , the event variable associated with  is  and the TEMPFOC of  is the most recent event / activity processed , possibly e  itself :
 describes a state , or
 describes a state and  describes an activity .
 describes a simple tense event , or
 describes a complex tense clause and  describes a complex tense event , or
 describes an event and  describes an atelic or a simple tense state , or
 describes a state and  describes a simple tense activity .
 describes an event , or
 doesn't describe an activity and  describes a past perfect stative .
 describes an activity and  describes an atelic , or
 and  describe states and either  describes a simple tense state or
 describes a complex tense state .
Using this algorithm , we can precisely identify the rhetorical and temporal relations when cue words to rhetorical structure are present , as in  :
We can also narrow the possibilities when no cue word is present by using constraints based on observations of tense and aspect interactions such as those shown in Table  .
For example , if  represents a simple past eventive sentence and  a past perfect eventive sentence , then in spite of the lack of rhetorical cues we know that e  precedes e  , as in  :
Also , when several structures are possible we can narrow the possibilities by using preferences , as in the examples below :
If we allow any of the four possible temporal relations between events , both continuations of sentence  would have 17 readings ( 4 x 4 + 1 reading in which the third sentence begins a new thread ) .
Using constraints , we reduce the number of readings to 4 .
Using preferences , we reduce that to 2 readings for each continuation .
The correct temporal relations are shown in  .
By using constraints and preferences , we can considerably reduce the amount of ambiguity in the temporal / rhetorical structure of a discourse .
However , explicit cues to rhetorical and temporal relations are not always available , and these cases result in more ambiguity than is desirable when processing large discourses .
Consider , however , that instead of generating all the possible temporal / rhetorical structures , we could use the information available to fill in the most restrictive type possible in the type hierarchy of temporal / rhetorical relations shown in Figure  .
We can then avoid generating the structures until higher-level information can be applied to complete the disambiguation process .
We presented a brief description of an algorithm for determining the temporal structure of discourse .
The algorithm is part of an HPSG-style discourse grammar implemented in Carpenter 's ALE formalism .
Its novel features are that it treats tense , aspect , temporal adverbials and rhetorical relations as mutually constraining ; it postulates less ambiguity than current temporal structuring algorithms do ; and it uses semantic closeness and other preference techniques rather than full-fledged world knowledge postulates to determine preferences over remaining ambiguities .
We also recommended using an underspecified representation of temporal / rhetorical structure to avoid generating all solutions until higher-level knowledge can aid in reducing ambiguity .
