The important part of semantics of complex sentence is captured as relations among semantic roles in subordinate and main clause respectively .
However if there can be relations between every pair of semantic roles , the amount of computation to identify the relations that hold in the given sentence is extremely large .
In this paper , for semantics of Japanese complex sentence , we introduce new pragmatic roles called observer and motivated respectively to bridge semantic roles of subordinate and those of main clauses .
By these new roles constraints on the relations among semantic / pragmatic roles are known to be almost local within subordinate or main clause .
In other words , as for the semantics of the whole complex sentence , the only role we should deal with is a motivated .
Our aim is to formalize constraints that are needed to develop a parser based on unification grammar ( called `` UG '' henceforth ) so that our parser can deal with variety of types of sentences in Japanese .
However just parsing syntactically is not enough for natural language understanding .
One important and necessary task to be done , when a parser processes a discourse in Japanese , is the so called zero anaphora resolution .
All of syntactic , semantic , and pragmatic constraints are to be involved to resolve zero anaphora .
Of course , some of omitted pronouns are syntactically resolved .
For instance , VP with suffix te is not regarded as a clause but a conjunct VP .
Therefore the subject of the VP with te , which is possibly omitted from surface , should corefer with the subject of the sentence .
One example is
where both of zero subjects  and  refer to the sentential topic Hanako .
In this example , one of the possible accounts for this interpretation is the following .
Zero subject of - te phrase is [+anaphoric,+pronominal ] or PRO in GB term Sells 1985 .
As the result ,  is controlled by the subject  of the main VP , which is also zero subject .
 is , in GB term , [-anaphoric,+pronominal ] or pro .
The sentential topic Hanako is the only possible antecedent of this zero subject in this example .
However , in complex sentences , things are quite different .
Consider the following sentence .
If contextually we can take only Hanako and the speaker of this sentence as candidates of antecedent of  or  , intuitively the following two interpretations are equally likely .
Therefore  and  are both pro .
In fact this fact is well known among Japanese linguists , i.e. Sells 1985, Takubo 1987 .
As a result , zero anaphora resolution of complex sentence is not only to be done syntactically , but also to be done pragmatically and / or semantically .
One of the promising candidate for this is the centering theory Brennan et al. 1987, Walker 1990 .
To apply the centering theory that is originally for a sequence of sentences , namely discourse , we regard the subordinate clause and the main clause as a segment of discourse respectively .
Moreover Hanako who is marked by ` wa ' is regarded as the topic for these two clauses .
Then , the topic Hanako is the strongest candidate for the backward center of the subordinate clause .
Therefore the backward center of the subordinate clause is Hanako , and consequently zero subject  refers to Hanako .
By the same way as the subordinate clause case is dealt with , the zero subject of the main clause  is known to refer to Hanako , too .
This result is neither interpretation  nor  shown above .
Another candidate is the property sharing thoery Kameyama 1988 .
In her theory , since the both of zero subjects share the subjecthood , both of them finally are known to refer to Hanako that is the topic for both of these clauses .
Therefore the property sharing theory also fails to account for the intuitive interpretations .
Then we shift our attention to more microscopic one , in which , roughly speaking , the important part of semantics of complex sentence is formalized as relations among semantic roles that appear in the main clause or the subordinate clause .
At the first glance , the constraints about these relations are not local in terms of main or subordinate clauses .
In other words , semantic roles that appear in subordinate clause and semantic roles that appear in the main clause seem to be directly constrained by the constraints of complex sentence .
However , looking more carefully , we find that the constraints of subordinate clause and the constraints of main clause are represented as local constraints by introducing the new notion of motivated which is characterized as a person who has enough reason to act as the main clause describes .
More precisely , motivated is one of the pragmatic roles that appear in a subordinate clause , and the constraints in subordinate clause are stated as identity relations between motivated and other semantic / pragmatic roles appearing in subordinate clause .
Therefore these constraints are local in subordinate clause .
The constraints in main clause are stated as identity relations between motivated which comes from subordinate clause , and other semantic roles appearing in main clause .
Therefore in understanding the main clause we don't have to be care about semantic / pragmatic roles in subordinate clause other than a motivated .
In this sense , the constraints in the main clause can be treated as almost local constraints of the main clause .
The next question is how to represent the semantics of complex sentence in feature structure ( called FS henceforth ) .
For this , we should write down the constraints about these relations among semantic / pragmatic roles in a feature structure formalism .
Due to the space limitation , in this paper we mainly pursue the constraints about semantic feature structures .
We pay our attention to the general structure of Japanese utterance which is helpful to represent semantics of complex sentence .
Several Japanese linguists have already proposed the general structure of Japanese utterances Mikami 1953 , Minami 1974 , Takubo 1987, Gunji 1989 .
Mikami categorized clauses into three classes , namely ` open ' , ` semi-open ' and ` closed ' .
This categorization indicates how freely the content of clause interacts with the outside of clause .
For instance , they are categorized by the degree of possibilities of coreference between zero pronouns inside the subordinate clause and nominal or topic that appear in the main clause .
Following Mikami 's idea , Minami proposed four levels , namely level A , B , C and D which correspond roughly to VP , proposition , sentence without communication mood and utterance which takes into account a hearer , respectively .
Takubo 1987 divided level A into two levels .
One of them corresponds to VP , the other corresponds to VP + a certain kind of subject which is called `` objective subject '' .
Gunji proposed the more detailed structure , in which starting from predicate , say , verb and adjective , objects , voice , subject , aspect , tense , modality , topic and mood are or might be sequentially added to make an informationally more fulfilled sentence component .
Finally , it ends up with an utterance .
In Gunji 's structure , some node can have more than two daughter nodes to make more complex sentence .
Following them , the structure of the so called ( cluase level ) complex sentence is the following shown in Fig.  .
In Fig.  , Sub-Clause and Conjunct mean subordinate clause and conjunctive particle respectively .
Note that Fig.  represents not only the hierarchical structure but also the word order of a complex sentence in Japanese .
The structure is almost the same as Gunji 's structure except for explicitly showing complex proposition , subordinate-clause and conjunctive-particle that are newly added to deal with complex sentences .
Note that ` Comment ' appearing in ` Sub-Clause ' has the same structure as ` Comment ' appearing just below ` Judgement ' .
That is to say , ` Comment ' is recursively defined .
However , in practice , the more the level of depth of recursively appearing ` Comment ' is , the less comprehensible the sentence is .
In this section , at first we show the predicate categories used in the subordinate clauses that we deal with in this paper , in Table  .
In each category of  , , ,  and  , exists there a person who is affected by the situation described by the subordinate clause .
On the contrary , in category  , there is not necessarily an explicit affected person .
In our theory , this affected person plays a key role for semantics of complex sentence .
As the result , in general we cannot derive a useful result for category  in our theory .
Therefore we don't deal with category  in this paper .
At this moment , we should explain the nature of the so called subjective predicate mentioned in Table  .
In short a subjective predicate describes the experiencer 's inner state which can exclusively be known by the experiencer him / herself .
Next we focus on verbal suffix garu .
Firstly we show garu 's syntax .
Garu is the present form and its root form is gar .
Therefore inflections are as follows : gar-re , gar-i , etc .
In addition , garu has an allophonic root form gat and , gat-ta ( past-form ) , gat-teiru ( progressive-form ) and so on are derived from gat .
Some of these forms will appear in our examples .
Next we talk about the semantics of garu .
Garu roughly means `` show a sign of '' or `` behave like .. ing '' Ohye 1975 .
Also in Palmer 1986 its semantics is informally explained , however our proposal is to formalize garu 's semantics in UG or more generally in computational linguistics .
For this , first of all , we introduce a new pragmatic role called observer .
Although this notion of observer shares a large part with PIVOT of Iida-Sells 1988 , our notion of observer is introduced only by garu .
Therefore it is much narrower notion .
As you will see later , this newly introduced role is playing a key role which bridges semantic roles of subordinate clause to semantic roles of main clause .
As for an observer introduced by garu , one of the widely known consequence about the nature of subjective predicate is the following .
In a sentence , if a subjective adjective is used without being followed by a verbal suffix garu , the experiencer of the subjective adjective should be the speaker of the sentence .
The next thing we should do about a newly introduced notion of observer is to make clear the way to deal with it in FS .
First of all , in our FS , a semantic content : SEM is basically a soa ( state of affair ) form of situation semantics .
However we use semantic role like `` agent '' , `` patient '' , `` experiencer '' , and so on , as argument roles of soa .
Since an observer observes the situation which is characterized by a soa , if we know that there exists an observer , the observed soa is embedded in observing situation , which , in turn , is embedded in the whole semantic content .
In this sense , the observed soa 's argument role is observed .
But as far as we have no confusion , we omit role name ` observed ' henceforth .
A typical schema of SEM of FS of this type is the following .
Note that we use garu as a value of the relation feature meant by ` rel ' .
The English gross of this relation garu is ` observe ' .
Now we explain the semantics of clause which consists of subjective adjective with garu or ta-garu , that are in categories  and  .
These categories ' forms are ``  P-garu '' or its past form ``  P-gat-ta '' , where P is a subjective adjective ( category 4 in Table  ) or is a verb followed by ta-gar ( category 5 in Table  ) , and  is the experiencer of P which is possibly zero .
In these categories , there exist observers who are not the experiencer of P , and observe that experience .
The SEM feature of ``  P-garu / gat-ta '' is the following .
where ``  '' means `` not token identical . ''
In our FS , constraints for tokens like  are written with `` where '' as shown in this FS .
Since constraint satisfaction method in UG has been and is developed by many researchers recently i.e. Tsuda 1991 , our theory will be able to be implemented in systems like theirs .
If a clause with `` garu / gat-ta '' is a subordinate clause , the experiencer cannot be identified with a semantic role corresponding to the subject of main clause or higher clause .
As for category  , subjective verbs like `` kurusimu '' ( feel sick ) and `` kanasimu '' ( feel sadness ) that describe subjective and / or emotional experience in verb form , are used .
Like the case of garu , an observer who observers the experience can be introduced .
However this observer is not obligatory .
Therefore unlike the `` garu / gat-ta '' case , the experiencer also can be an obligatory semantic role of higher clause as well as the speaker .
According to the hierachical structure of Japanese sentence shown in Fig.  , the essential part of hierarchical structure of the following sentence  is shown in Fig.  .
In this figure , the structure just below each proposition is replaced with the corresponding parts of sentence .
Basically the embedding structure of FS corresponds to the hierarchy shown in the hierarchical structure Fig.  .
To grasp the image of the relation between a hierarchical structure and the corresponding FS , we show an example of FS of the above complex sentence  analyzed based on this hierarchical structure in the following .
This FS is the result of the unification between the FSs of subordinate clause and main clause , where the contents of syntactic feature HEAD , namely  is omitted .
where English grosses of relation name is the following : sime : ` close ' , node : ` because ' , samu-i : ` feel cold ' .
The key point of the semantics of complex sentence is the role motivated that appears in  which corresponds to the content of the subordinate clause .
The role motivated is the link between the content of subordinate clause and the main clause .
Semantically motivated is characterized as the following .
The important and indispensable part of semantics of complex sentence is , roughly speaking , the relation between a subordinate clause and the main clause .
But if you look more closely , this relation is actually the relations among semantic / pragmatic roles appearing in the subordinate clause and those appearing in the main clause .
The newly introduced role of motivated gives the most important clue for this relation .
Therefore , in the rest of this paper , our effort will be concentrated into whom a motivated refers to .
More precisely , in FS , our main concerns are which semantic role in the SEM of subordinate clause the motivated can or cannot be unified with , and which semantic role in the SEM of main clause the motivated can or cannot be unified with .
In this subsection , we propose the constraints on complex sentence .
For this , at first we categorize the relations between subordinate clause and main clause based on their semantics .
They are divided up to many types of complex sentence .
We show the most important and typical types in Table  , where SC and MC mean ` subordinate clause ' and ` main clause ' respectively .
In this table , the first column is for a name of sentence type , the second column indicates a rough meaning of the relation between subordinate clause SC and main clause MC of complex sentence , and the third column shows Japanese conjunctive particles used to represent a type of complex sentence in the same row .
Three VP adjuncts , te , tutu , and nagara , are usually used to express events ocurring simultaneously .
However , if they are used with aspectual suffix i which means perfective , for instance i-nagara , they are regarded as clause conjuncts and are to be interpreted as ` although ' Minami 1974 .
We don't deal with type  , because a temporal adverbial clause just describes an event that occurs before , simultaneously or after another event which is described by the main clause .
Therefore generally we don't expect essential information for relations among semantic roles appearing in adverbial or main clause from this type of sentence .
Now we focus on type  ,  and  , where a motivated plays the key role in the constraints .
In Table  we show the constraints that say which semantic / pragmatic role of subordinate clause can be a motivated .
Table  shows which semantic role of main clause can be unified with the motivated .
In these tables , the first column of the first row is for constraint names , the second column shows a set of sentence types for which the constraints shown in the second row apply .
The third column of Table  shows predicate patterns of subordinate clause , and the third column of Table  shows semantic categories of predicate of main clause .
For them , constraints written in the second row apply .
Note that all of these constraints in Table  are local in a subordinate clause , because both sides of = of constraints are roles of subordinate clause .
In case of subjective adjective without garu , the constraint ` motivated = experiencer ' holds also for type 1 except for the case where directionally auxiliary verb `` yaru ( give ) '' , `` kureru ( be given ) '' are used .
Analysis for these cases is one of our future problem .
As for Table  ,  is a state except for the case that there exists a third party who is a motivated puts the experiencer into that state .
For instance , the experiencer is permitted to do something by the motivated .
Since in this kind of case things are quite complicated , we omit it here because of the limited space .
Constraints in Table  are also local in a main clause because every semantic role that appeares in the righthand side of the constraints is defined within the main clause .
Needless to say , the influence from a subordinate clause comes only via role motivated .
[TABLE] where ` name ' means a name of each constraint .
In the rest of this section we show the examples that exemplify these constraints .
First , we take  of type  .
The constraints to be applied are  and  as you know from the contents of subordinate and main clause .
By combination of  and  , zero agent of main clause :  is the observer of the situation described by the subordinate clause , where  behaved like feeling cold .
This interpretation coincides with native 's intuition .
Look at the following pair of example .
In both of  and  , the motivateds of subordinate clause are constrained by  , namely motivateds can be either  or the observer of subordinate clause .
Constraint  says that in both cases ,  is unified with the motivated .
Intuitively in  ,  is  .
On the other hand in  ,  is the observer .
Both of these interpretations comply with constraints  , and  .
Intuitively  corefer with  .
This interpretation is expected by constraint  and  that apply in this case .
As you know from these examples , our constraints are not strong enough to identify the antecedent of  uniquely , but makes safe interpretations .
Moreover disambiguation done by these constraints is useful for further inference that will be done with commonsense knowledge or with a special vocabulary like ` kekkyoku ( finally ) ' used in  .
In case of  , namely intransitive passive or adversity passive , it is well known , i.e. Gunji 1987 that there exists a person who is affected by the situation described by the passive sentence .
An example sentence is the following .
The semantic role of this affected person , in  zero role :  whose wife was dead , is an affected .
The intuitive interpretation that  , is expected by our constraints :  of Table  and  of Table  .
On the contrary , in case of  , namely transitive passive , generally we don't have an affected .
However in some context , a transitive passive form may require the role affected which is inherent to adversity passive .
For instance ,
In this case , a person whose wallet was stolen is not explicit but regarded as an affected .
Another case having an affected is that a relational noun is the subject of transitive passive .
Then a person who is in the relation expressed by the relational noun is thought to be affected by that situation , too .
Here we take ` mother ' , ` father ' , ` daughter ' , ` son ' , ` supervisor ' , and so forth as a relational noun .
A couple of example sentences are the following .
 who retaliated  ( or didn't retaliate  ) has a certain relation between the henchman who had been attacked .
For instance ,  may be the boss of that henchman .
In  , since constraint  of Table  and  of Table  apply ,  is an affected of attacking event described in the subordinate clause .
This interpretation coincides with native 's intuition .
In sum , with these constraints , a constraint satisfaction process in UG based parsing can be done locally and consequently very efficiently .
In other words , primarily a constraint satisfaction process of a subordinate clause can be done within the analysis of subordinate clause , and that of the main clause can be done within it except for using motivated whose value has already been constrained in the subordinate clause .
One of the relevant researches to ours is JPSG that has been developed by Gunji 1987 , Gunji 1989 and is further studied by the ICOT working group .
Our focus is a more pragmatics oriented one than JPSG is .
Many Japanese linguists have already done the enormous amount of basic observations and proposed linguistic theories about the phenomena we deal with in this paper Mikami 1953 , Kuno 1973 , Kuno 1978 , Ohye 1975 , Minami 1974 , Takubo 1987 , Teramura 1984 , Teramura 1990, Saito 1992 .
Of course our research is based on their works and observations .
In Ohye 1975 , it is said that if garu is used in a subordinate clause , the subject of the main clause is not the experiencer of the subordinate clause .
In linguistic phenomena , these observations are similar to the constraint we propose here .
So what is new ?
The answer is that :
We explicitly state the semantics of complex sentence as the relations among semantic roles .
Namely , since we use semantic / pragmatic roles instead of grammatical roles in constraints , our constraints can account for zero anaphora in a sentence where the main clause is passive where an agent or an experiencer is not necessarily the subject , like the following example .
where the intuitive reading is the following :  , that is zero subject , refers to Taro , and  , that is not the zero subject , refers to Taro 's parents who are the observer and motivated of the subordinate clause .
We formalize this theory in UG formalism , even though the details are omitted due to the space limitation .
We find that the constraints of complex sentences are actually local ones .
This localization of constraint was found by introducing new pragmatic roles observer and motivated , and is extremely important for efficiency of UG based parsing .
This localization also makes the proposed constraints be compositional ones , because in the case of deeply embedded complex sentence to identify the referent of each motivated that bridges between a subordinate clause and its main clause , the constraints we proposed are resolved with computation confined within each clause .
Analysis of case in which a directional auxiliary verb i.e. ` yaru ' , ` kureru ' is used is left as the future problem .
Finally , we implemented a Japanese language understanding system based on the theory we state in this paper , but due to the space limitation we will report the detail of implementation in other place in the near future .
